GERMANICUS, the father of Caius Caesar, and son of Drusus and the younger
						Antonia, was, after his adoption by
						Tiberius, his uncle, preferred to
					the quaestorship five years before he had
					attained the legal age, and immediately upon the expiration of that office, to
					the consulship. Having been sent to the
					army in Germany , he restored order
					among the legions, who, upon the news of Augustus's death, obstinately refused
					to acknowledge Tiberius as emperor, and
					offered to place him at the head of the state. In which affair it is difficult
					to say, whether his regard to filial duty, or the firmness of his resolution,
					was most conspicuous. Soon afterwards he defeated the enemy, and obtained the
					honours of a triumph. Being then made consul for the second time, before he could enter upon his office he
					was obliged to set out suddenly for the east, where, after he had conquered the
					king of Armenia , and reduced Cappadocia into the form of a province, he
					died at Antioch , of a lingering
					distemper, in the thirty-fourth year of his age, not without the suspicion of being poisoned. For besides the
					livid spots which appeared all over his body, and a foaming at the mouth; when
					his corpse was burnt, the heart was found entire among the bones; its nature
					being such, as it is supposed, that when tainted by poison, it is indestructible
					by fire.

It was a prevailing opinion that he was taken off by the contrivance of Tiberius
					and through the means of Cneius Piso. This person, who was about the same time
					prefect of Syria , and made no secret of
					his position being such, that he must either offend the fathe ror the son,
					loaded Germanicus, even during his sickness, with the most unbounded and
					scurrilous abuse, both by word and deed; for which, upon his return to
						 Rome , he narrowly escaped being
					torn to pieces by the people, and was condemned to death by the senate.

It is generally agreed, that Germanicus possessed all the noblest endowments of
					body and mind in a higher degree than had ever before fallen to the lot of any
					man; a handsome person, extraordinary courage, great proficiency in eloquence
					and other branches of learning, both Greek and Roman; besides a singular
					humanity, and a behaviour so engaging, as to captivate the affections of all
					about him. The slenderness of his legs did not correspond with the symmetry and
					beauty of his person in other respects; but this defect was at length corrected
					by his habit of riding after meals. In battle, he often engaged and slew an
					enemy in single combat. He pleaded causes, even after he had the honour of a
					triumph. Among other fruits of his studies, he left behind him some Greek
					comedies. Both at home and abroad he always conducted himself in a manner the
					most unassuming. On entering any free and confederate town, he never would be
					attended by any of his lictors. Whenever he heard, in his travels, of the tombs
					of illustrious men, he made offerings over them to the infernal deities. He gave
					a common grave, under a mound of earth, to the scattered relics of the
					legionaries slain under Varus, and was the first to put his hand to the work of
					collecting and bringing them to the place of burial. He was so extremely mild
					and gentle to his enemies, whoever they were, or on what account soever they
					bore him enmity, that, although Piso rescinded his decrees, and for a long time
					severely harassed his dependents, he never showed the smallest resentment, until
					he found himself attacked by magical charms and imprecations; and even then the
					only steps he took was to renounce all friendship with him, according to ancient
					custom, and to exhort his servants to avenge his death, if any thing untoward
					should befal him.

He reaped the fruit of his noble qualities in abundance, being so much esteemed
					and beloved by his friends, that Augustus (to say nothing of his other
					relations) being a long time in doubt, whether he should not appoint him his
					successor, at last ordered Tiberius to adopt him. He was so extremely popular,
					that many authors tell us, the crowds of those who went to meet him upon his
					coming to any place, or to attend him at his departure, were so prodigious, that
					he was sometimes in danger of his life; and that upon his return from Germany , after he had quelled the mutiny in
					the army there, all the cohorts of the pretorian guards marched out to meet him,
					notwithstanding the order that only two should go; and that all the people of
						 Rome , both men and women, of every
					age, sex, and rank, flocked as far as the twentieth mile-stone to attend his
					entrance.

At the time of his death, however, and afterwards, they displayed still greater
					and stronger proofs of their extraordinary attachment to him. The day on which
					he died, stones were thrown at the temples, the altars of the gods demolished,
					the household gods, in some cases, thrown into the streets, and new-born infants
					exposed. It is even said that barbarous nations, both those engaged in intestine
					wars, and those in hostilities against us, all agreed to a cessation of arms, as
					if they had been mourning for some very near and common friend; that some petty
					kings shaved their beards and their wives heads, in token of their extreme
					sorrow; and that the king of kings forbore his exercise of hunting and feasting with; his
					nobles, which, amongst the Parthians, is equivaleii to a cessation of all
					business in a time of public mourning with us.

At Rome , upon the first news of his
					sickness, the city was thrown into great consternation and grief, waiting
					impatiently for farther intelligence; when suddenly, in the evening, a report,
					without any certain author, was spread, that he was recovered; upon which the
					people flocked with torches and victims to the Capitol, and were in such haste
					to pay the vows they had made for his recovery, that they almost broke open the
					doors. Tiberius was roused from out of his sleep with the noise of the people
					congratulating one another, and singing about the streets, Salva Roma, salva patria, salvus est Germanicus, 
					 Rome is safe,
							our country safe, for our Germanicus is safe. But when
					certain intelligence of his death arrived, the mourning of the people could
					neither be assuaged by consolation, nor restrained by edicts, and it continued
					during the holidays in the month of December. The atrocities of the subsequent
					times contributed much to the glory of Germanicus, and the endearment of his
					memory; all people supposing, and with reason, that the fear and awe of him had
					laid a restraint upon the cruelty of Tiberius, which broke out soon
					afterwards.

Germanicus married Agrippina, the daughter of Marcus Agrippa and Julia , by whom he had nine children, two of
					whom died in their infancy, and another a few years after; a sprightly boy,
					whose effigy, in the character of a Cupid, Livia set up in the temple of Venus in the Capitol. Augustus also placed 'another statue of
					him in his bed-chamber, and used to kiss it as often as he entered the
					apartment. The rest survived their father; three daughters, Agrippina,
						 Drusilla , and -Livilla, who were
					born in three successive years; and as many sons, Nero , Drusus, and Caius Caesar. Nero and Drusus, at the accusation of Tiberius, were declared
					public.enemies.

Caius Caesar was born on the day before the calends [31st August] of September,
					at the time his father and Caius Fonteius Capito were consuls. But where he was born is rendered
					uncertain from the number of places which are said to have given him birth.
					Cneius Lentulus Gaetulicus says that he was born at
						 Tibur ; Pliny the younger, in the
					country of the Treviri , at a village
					called Ambiatinus, above Confluentes; and he alleges, as a proof of it, that altars are there
					shown with this inscription: "For Agrippina's child-birth." Some verses which
					were published in his reign, intimate that he was born in the winter quarters of
					the legions, In castris natus, patriis nutritius in
							armis, 
						 Jam designati principis omen erat. 
					 Born in the camp, and trained in every toil 
						 Which taught his sire the haughtiest foes to foil; 
						 Destin'd he seem'd by fate to raise his name, 
						 And rule the empire with Augustan fame. I find in the public
					registers that he was born at Antium . Pliny charges Gaetulicus as guilty of an arrant forgery,
					merely to soothe the vanity of a conceited young prince, by giving him the
					lustre of being born in a city sacred to Hercules; and says that he advanced
					this false assertion with the more assurance, because, the year before the birth
					of Caius, Germanicus had a son of the same name born at Tibur ; concerning whose amiable childhood
					and premature death I have already spoken. Dates clearly prove that Pliny is mistaken; for the writers of
					Augustus's history all agree, that Germanicus, at the expiration of his
					consulship, was sent into Gaul , after
					the birth of Caius. Nor will the inscription upon the altar serve to establish
					Pliny's opinion; because Agrippina was delivered of two daughters in that
					country, and any child-birth, without regard to sex, is called puerperium, as
					the ancients used to call girs puerat, and boys puelli. There is also extant a
					letter written by Augustus, a few months before his death, to his granddaughter
					Agrippina, about the same Caius (for there was then no other child of hers
					living under that name). He writes as follows: "I gave orders yesterday for
					Talarius and Asellius to set out on their journey towards you, if the gods
					permit, with your child Caius, upon the fifteenth of the calends of June [I8th
					May]. I also send with him a physician of mine, and I wrote to Germanicus that
					he may retain him if he pleases. Farewell, my dear Agrippina, and take what care
					you can to come safe and well to your Germanicus." I imagine it is sufficiently
					evident that Caius could not be born at a place to which he was carried from The
					City when almost two years 'old. The same considerations must likewise
					invalidate the evidence of the verses, and the rather, because the author is
					unknown. The only authority, therefore, upon which we can depend in this matter,
					is that of the acts, and the public register; especially as he always preferred
						 Antium to every other place of
					retirement, and entertained for it all that fondness which is commonly attached
					to one's native soil. It is said, too, that, upon his growing weary of the city,
					he designed to have transferred thither the seat of empire.

It was to the jokes of the soldiers in the camp that he owed the name of
						Caligula, he having been brought up among them in the dress of a common
					soldier. How much his education amongst them recommended him to their favour and
					affection, was sufficiently apparent in the mutiny upon the death of Augustus,
					when the mere sight of him appeased their fury, though it had risen to a great
					height. For they persisted in it, until they observed that he was sent away to a
					neighbouring city, to secure him against all danger. Then, at last,
					they began to relent, and, stopping the chariot in which he was conveyed,
					earnestly deprecated the odium to which such a proceeding would expose them.

He likewise attended his father in his expedition to Syria . After his return, he lived first with his mother, and,
					when she was banished, with his great-granrmother, Livia Augusta, in praise of
					whom, after her decease, though then only a boy, he pronounced a funeral oration
					in the Rostra. He was then transferred to the family of his grandmother Antonia,
					and afterwards, in the twentieth year of his age, being called by Tiberius to
						 Capri , he in one and the same day
					assumed the manly habit, and shaved his beard, but without receiving any of the
					honours which had been paid to his brothers on a similar oeeasien. While he
					remained in that island, many insidious artifices were practised, to extort from
					him complaints against Tiberius, but by his circumspection he avoided falling
					into the snare. He affected to take no more notice of
					the ill-treatment of his relations, than if nothing had befallen them. With
					regard to his own sufferings, he seemed utterly insensible of them, and behaved
					with such obsequiousness to his grandfather and all about him, that it was
					justly said of him, "There never was a better servant, nor a worse master."

But he could not even then conceal his natural disposition to cruelty and
					lewdness. He delighted in witnessing the inflictions of punishments, and
					frequented tavernsand bawdy-houses in the night-time, disguised in a periwig
					-and a long coat; and was passionately addicted to the theatrical arts of
					singing and dancing. All these levities Tiberius readily connived at, in hopes
					that they might perhaps correct the roughness of his temper, which the sagacious
					old man so well understood, that he often said, "That Caius was destined to be
					the ruin of himself and all mankind; and that he was rearing a hydra for the people of
						 Rome , and a Phaeton for all the
					world.

Not long afterwards, he married Junia Claudilla, the daughter of Marcus Silanus,
					a man of the highest rank. Being then chosen augur in the room of his brother
					Drusus, before he could be inaugurated he was advanced to the pontificate, with
					no small commendation of his dutiful behaviour, and great capacity. The
					situation of the court likewise was at this time favourable to his fortunes, as
					it was now left destitute of support, Sejanus being suspected, and soon
					afterwards taken off; and he was by degrees flattered with the hope of
					succeeding Tiberius in the empire. In order more effectually to secure this
					object, upon Junia's dying in child-bed, he engaged in a criminal commerce with
					Ennia Naevia, the wife of Marco , at
					that time prefect of the pretorian cohorts; promising to marry her if he became
					emperor, to which he bound himself, not only by an oath, but by a written
					obligation under his hand. Having by her means insinuated himself into
						 Marco 's favour, some are of opinion
					that he attempted to poison Tiberius ,
					and ordered his ring to be taken from him, before tihe breath was out of his
					body; and that, because he seemed to hold it fast, he caused a pillow to be
					thrown upon him, squeezing him
					by the throat, at the same time, with his own hand. One of his freedmen crying
					out at this horrid barbarity, he was immediately crucified. These circumstances
					are far from being improbable, as some authors relate that, afterwards, though
					he did not acknowledge his having a hand in the death of Tiberius , yet he frankly declared that he had
					formerly entertained such a design; and as a proof of his affection for his
					relations, he would frequently boast, "That, to revenge the death of his mother
					and brothers, he had entered the chamber of Tiberius , when he was asleep, with a poniard, but being seized
					with a fit of compassion, threw it away, and retired; and that Tiberius , though aware of his intention, durst
					not make any inquiries, or attempt revenge."

Having thus secured the imperial power, he fulfilled by his elevation the wish of
					the Roman people, I may venture to say, of all mankind; for he long been the
					object of expectation and desire to the greater part of the provincials and
					soldiers who had known him when a child; and to the whole people of Rome , from their affection for the memory of
					Germanicus, his father, and compassion for the family almost entirely destroyed.
					Upon his moving from Misenum ,
					therefore, although he was in mourning, and following the corpse of Tiberius , he had to walk amidst altars,
					victims, and lighted torches, with prodigious crowds of people everywhere
					attending him, in transports of joy, and calling him, besides other auspicious
					names, by those of "their star," " their chick," "their pretty puppet," and
					"bantling."

Immediately pn his entering the city, by the joint acclamations of the senate,
					and people, who broke into the senate-house, Tiberius 's will was set aside, it having left his other
						grandson, then a minor,
					co-heir with him, the whole government and administration of affairs was placed
					in his hands; so much to the joy and satisfaction of the public, that, in less
					than three months after, above a hundred and sixty thousand victims are said to
					have been offered in sacrifice. Upon his going, a few days afterwards, to the
					nearest islands on the coast of Campania , vows were made for his safe return;
					every person emulously testifying their care and concern for his safety. And
					when he fell ill, the people hung about the Palatium all night long; some vowed,
					in public handbills, to risk their lives in the combats of the amphitheatre, and
					others to lay them down, for his recovery. To this extraordinary love
					entertained for him by his countrymen, was added an uncommon regard by foreign
					nations. Even Artabanus, king of the Parthians, who had always manifested hatred
					and contempt for Tiberius, solicited his friendship; came to hold a conference
					with his consular lieutenant, and passing the Euphrates , paid the highest honours to the eagles, the Roman
					standards, and the images of the Caesars.

Caligula himself inflamed this devotion, by practising all the arts of
					popularity. After he had delivered, with floods of tears, a speech in praise of
					Tiberius, and buried him with the utmost pomp, he immediately hastened over to
					Pandataria and the Pontian islands, to bring thence the ashes of his mother and brother; and, to
					testify the great regard he had for their memory, he performed the voyage in a
					very tempestuous season. He approached their remains with profound veneration,
					and deposited them in the urns with his own hands. Having brought them in grand
					solemnity to Ostia , with an ensign flying
					in the stern of the galley, and thence up the Tiber to Rome , they
					were borne by persons of the first distinction in the equestrian order, on two
					biers, into the mausoleum, at noon-day. He appointed
					yearly offerings to be solemnly and publicly celebrated to their memory, besides
					Circensian games to that of his mother, and a chariot with her image to be
					included in the procession. The month of September he
					called Germanicus, in honour of his father. By a single decree of the senate,-he
					heaped upon his grandmother, Antonia ,
					all the honours which had been ever conferred on the empress.- Livia . His uncle, Claudius, who till then
					continued in the equestrian order, he took for his colleague in the consulship.
					He adopted his brother, Tiberius , on
					the day he took upon him the manly habit, and conferred upon him the title of
					"Prince of the Youths." As for his sisters, he ordered these words to be added
					to the oaths of allegiance to himself: "Nor will I hold myself or my own
					children more dear than I do Caius and his sisters:" and commanded.all resolutions proposed by the
					consuls in the senate to be prefaced thus: " May what we are going to do, prove
					fortunate and happy to Caius Caesar and his sisters." With the like popularity
					he restored all those who had been condemned and banished and granted an act of
					indemnity against all impeachments and past offenses. To relieve the informers
					and witnesses against his mother and brothers from all apprehension, he brought
					the records of their trials into the forum, and there burnt them, calling loudly
					on the gods to witness that he had not read or handled them. A memorial which
					was offered him relative to his own security, he would not receive, declaring,
					"that he had done nothing to make any one his enemy:" and said, at the same
					time, "he had no ears for informers."

The Spintriae he banished from the city, being prevailed upon not to throw them
					into the sea, as he had intended. The writings of Titus Lubienus, Cordus
					Cremutius, and Cassius Severus, which had been suppressed by an act of the
					senate, he permitted to be drawn from obscurity, and universally read;
					observing, "that it would be for his own advantage to have the transactions of
					former times delivered to posterity." He published accounts of the proceedings
					of the government-a practice which had been introduced by Augustus, but
					discontinued by Tiberius . He
					granted the magistrates a full and free jurisdiction, without any appeal to
					himself. He made a very strict and exact review of the Roman knights, but
					conducted it with moderation; publicly depriving of his horse every knight who
					lay under the stigma of any thing base and dishonourable; but passing over the
					names of those knights who were only guilty of venial faults, in calling over
					the list of the order. To lighten the labours of the judges, he added a fifth
					class to the former four. He attempted likewise to restore to the people their
					ancient right of voting in the choice of magistrates. He paid very honourably, and without any dispute, the
					legacies left by Tiberius in his will,
					though it had been set aside; as likewise those left by the will of Livia
					Augusta, which Tiberius had annulled.
					He remitted the hundredth penny, due to the government in all auctions
					throughout Italy . He made up to many
					their losses sustained by fire; and. when he restored their kingdoms. to any
					princes, he likewise allowed them all the arrears of the taxes.-and revenues
					which had accrued in the interval; as in the case of Antiochus of Comagene,
					where the confiscation would have amounted to a hundred millions of sesterces.
					T6, prove to the world that he was ready to encourage good examples of every
					kind, he gave to a freed-woman eighty thousand sesterces, for not discovering a
					crime committed by her patron, though she had been put to exquisite torture for
					that purpose. For all these acts of beneficence, amongst other honours, a golden
					shield was decreed to him, which the colleges of priests were to carry annually,
					upon a fixed day, into the Capitol, with the senate attending, and the youth of
					the nobility, of both sexes, celebrating the praise of his virtues in songs. It
					was likewise ordained, that the day on which he succeeded to the empire should
					be called Palilia, in token of the city's being at that time, as it were, new
					founded.

He held the consulship four times: the first, from the calends [the first] of July for two months; the
						second, from the calends of January
					for thirty days; the third, until the
					ides [the 13th] of January; and the fourth, until the seventh of the same ides [7th January]. Of these, the
					two last he held successively. The third he assumed by his sole authority at
						 Lyons ; not, as some are of opinion,
					from arrogance or neglect of rules; but because, at that distance, it was
					impossible for him to know that his colleague had died a little before the
					beginning of the new year. He twice distributed to the people a bounty of three
					hundred sesterces a man, and as often gave a splendid feast to the senate and
					the equestrian order, with their wives and children. In the latter, he presented
					to the men forensic garments, and to the women and children purple scarfs. To
					make a perpetual addition to the public joy for ever, he added to the
						Saturnalia one day,
					which he called juvenalis [the juvenile feast].

He exhibited some combats of gladiators, either in the amphitheatre of
						Taurus, or in
					the Septa , with which he intermingled
					troops of the best pugilists from Campania and Africa .
					He did not always preside in person on those occasions, but sometimes gave a
					commission to magistrates or friends to supply his place. He frequently
					entertained the people with stage-plays of various kinds, and in several parts
					of the city, and sometimes by night, when he caused the whole city to be
					lighted. He likewise gave various things to be scrambled for among the people,
					and distributed to every man a basket of bread with other victuals. Upon this
					occasion, he sent his own share to a Roman knight, who was seated opposite to
					him, and was enjoying himself by eating heartily. To a senator, who was doing
					the same, he sent an appointment of praetor-extraordinary. He likewise exhibited
					a great number of Circensian games from morning until night; intermixed with the
					hunting of wild beasts from Africa , or
					the Trojan exhibition. Some of these games were celebrated with peculiar
					circumstances; the Circus being overspread with vermilion and chrysolite; and
					none drove in the chariot races who were not of the senatorian order. For some
					of these he suddenly gave the signal, when, upon his viewing from the
						Gelotiana the
					preparations in the Circus, he was asked to do so by a few persons in the
					neighbouring galleries.

He invented besides a new kind of spectacle, such as had never been heard of
					before. For he made a bridge, of about three miles and a half in length, from
						 Baiae to the mole of Puteoli , 
					collecting trading vessels from all quarters, mooring them in two rows by their
					anchors, and spreading earth upon them to form a viaduct, after the fashion of
					the Appian way. This bridge he crossed and recrossed
					for two days together; the first day mounted on a horse richly caparisoned,
					wearing on his head a crown of oak leaves, armed with a battle-axe, a Spanish
					buckler and a sword, and in a cloak made of cloth of gold; the, day following,
					in the habit of a charioteer, standing in a chariot, drawn by two high-bred
					horses, having with him a young boy, Darius by name, one of the Parthian
					hostages, with a cohort of the pretorian guards attending him, and- a party of
					his friends in ,cars of Gaulish make. Most people, I know, are of opinion, that this bridge
					was designed by Caius, in imitation of Xerxes, who, to the astonishment of the
					world, laid a bridge over the Hellespont , which is somewhat narrower than the distance
					betwixt Baiae and Puteoli . Others, however, thought that he did
					it to strike terror in Germany and
						 Britain , which he was upon the
					point of invading, by the fame of some prodigious work. But for myself, when I
					was a boy, I heard my grandfather say, that the reason
					assigned by some courtiers who were in habits of the greatest intimacy with him,
					was this; when Tiberius was in some anxiety about the nomination of a successor,
					and rather inclined to pitch upon his grandson, Thrasyllus the astrologer had
					assured him, "That Caius would no more be emperor, than he would ride on
					horseback across the gulf of Baiae ."

He likewise exhibited public diversions in Sicily , Grecian games at Syracuse , and Attic plays at Lyons in Gaul : besides
					a contest for pre-eminence in the Grecian and Roman eloquence; in which we are
					told that such as were baffled bestowed rewards upon the best performers, and
					were obliged to compose speeches in their praise: but that those who performed
					the worst were forced to blot out what they had written with a sponge or their
					tongue, unless they preferred to be beaten with a rod, or plunged over head and
					ears into the nearest river.

He completed the works which were left unfinished by Tiberius, namely, the temple
					of Augustus, and the theatre of Pompey. He began, likewise, the aqueduct from
					the neighbourhood of Tibur , and an amphitheatre near
					the Septa ; of which works, one was
					completed by his successor Claudius, and the other remained as he left it. The
					walls of Syracuse , which had fallen to
					decay by length of time, he repaired, as he likewise did the temples of the
					gods. He formed plans for rebuilding the palace of Polycrates at Samos , finishing the temple of the Didymaean
					Apollo at Miletus , and building a town
					on a ridge of the Alps ; but, above all,
					for cutting through the isthmus in Achaia and even sent a centurion of the first rank to
					measure out the work.

Thus far we have spoken of him as a prince. What remains to be said of him,
					bespeaks him rather a monster than a man. He assumed a variety of titles, such
					as "Dutiful," "The Pious," "Child of the Camp, the Father of the Armies," and
					"The Greatest and Best Caesar." Upon hearing some kings, who came to the city to
					pay him court, conversing together at supper, about their illustrious descent,
					he exclaimed, εἶσ κοίρανοσ ἔτω, εἶς 
					 Let there be but one prince, one king. He was strongly inclined
					to assume the diadem, and change the form of government, from imperial to regal;
					but being told that he far exceeded the grandeur of kings and princes, he began
					to arrogate to himself a divine majesty. He ordered all the images of the gods,
					which were famous either for their beauty, or the veneration paid them, among
					which was that of Jupiter Olympius, to be brought from Greece , that he might take the heads off, and
					put on his own. Having continued part of the Palatium as far as the Forum, and
					the temple of Castor and Pollux being converted into a kind of vestibule to his
					house, he often stationed himself between the twin brothers, and so presented
					himself to be worshipped by all votaries; some of whom saluted him by the name
					of yupiter Latialis. He also instituted a temple and priests, with choicest
					victims, in honour of his own divinity. In his temple stood a statue of gold,
					the exact image of himself, which was daily dressed in garments corresponding
					with those he wore himself. The most opulent persons in the city offered
					themselves as candidates for the honour of being his priests, and purchased it
					successively at an immense price. The victims were flamingos, peacocks,
					bustards, guinea-fowls, turkey and pheasant hens, each sacrificed on their
					respective days. On nights when the moon was full, he was in the constant habit
					of inviting her to his embraces and his bed. In the day-time he talked in
					private to Jupiter Capitolinus; one while whispering to him, and another turning
					his ear to him; sometimes he spoke aloud, and in railing language. For he was
					overheard to threaten the god thus: ἤ ἐμ' ἀναίερ', 
					 Raise thou me up, or I'll- until being at last prevailed upon
					by the entreaties of the god, as he said, to take up his abode with him, he
					built a bridge over the temple of the Deified Augustus, by which he joined the
					Palatium to the Capitol. Afterwards, that he might be still nearer, he laid the
					foundations of a new palace in the very court of the Capitol.

He was unwilling to be thought or called the grandson of Agrippa, because of the
					obscurity of his birth; and he was offended if any one, either in prose or
					verse, ranked him amongst the Caesars. He said that his mother was the fruit of
					an incestuous commerce, maintained by Augustus with his daughter Julia. And not
					content with this vile reflection upon the memory of Augustus, he forbad his
					victories at Actium , and on the coast
					of Sicily , to be celebrated, as usual;
					affirming that they had been most pernicious and fatal to the Roman people. He
					called his grandmother Livia Augusta " Ulysses in a woman's dress," and had the
					indecency to reflect upon her in a letter to the senate, as of mean birth, and
					descended, by the mother's side, from a grandfather who was only one of the
					municipal magistrates of Fondi ; whereas
					it is certain, from the public records, that Aufidius Lurco held high offices at
						 Rome . His grandmother Antonia
					desiring a private conference with him, he refused to grant it, unless Macro,
					the prefect of the pretorian guards, were present. Indignities of this kind, and
					ill usage, were the cause of her death; but some think he also gave her poison.
					- Nor did he pay the smallest respect to hier memory after her death, but
					witnessed the burning from his private apartment. His brother Tiberius, who
					had'no expectation of any violence, was suddenly dispatched by a military
					tribune sent by his order for that purpose. He forced Silanus , his father-in-law, to kill himself,
					by cutting his throat with a razor. The pretext he alleged for these murders
					was, that the latter had not followed him upon his putting to sea in stormy
					weather, but stayed behind with the view of seizing the city, if he should
					perish. The other, he said, smelt of an antidote, which he had taken to prevent
					his being poisoned by him; whereas Silanus was only afraid of being seasick, and the
					disagreeableness of the voyage; and Tibenius had merely taken a medicine for an
					habitual cough, which was continually growing worse. As for his successor
					Claudius, he only saved him as a laughing-stock.

He lived in the habit of incest with all his sisters; and at table, when much
					company was present, he placed each of them in turns below him, whilst his wife
					reclined above him. It is believed, that he deflowered one of them, Drusilla,
					before he had assumed the robe of manhood; and was even caught in her embraces
					by his grandmother Antonia, with whom they were educated together. When she was
					afterwards married to Cassius Longinus, a man of consular rank, he took her from
					him, and kept her constantly as if she were his lawful wife. In a fit of
					sickness, he by his will appointed her heiress both of his estate and the
					empire. After her death, he ordered a public mourning for her; during which it
					was capital for any person to laugh, use the bath, or sup with his parents,
					wife, or children. Being inconsolable under his affliction, he went hastily, and
					in the night-time, from the City; going through Campania to Syracuse , and then suddenly returned without shaving his beard,
					or trimming his hair. Nor did he ever afterwards, in matters of the greatest
					importance, not even in the assemblies of the people or before the soldiers,
					swear any otherwise, than "By the divinity ofDrusilla." The rest of his sisters
					hedid not treat with so much fondness or regard; but frequently prostituted them
					to his catamites. He therefore the more readily condemned them in the case of
					AEmilius Lepidus, as guilty of adultery, and privy to that conspiracy against
					him. Nor did he only divulge their own handwriting relative to the affair, which
					he procured by base and lewd means, but likewise consecrated to Mars the Avenger
					three swords which had been prepared to stab him, with an inscription, setting
					forth the occasion of their consecration.

Whether in the marriage of his wives, in repudiating them, or retaining them, he
					acted with greater infamy, it is difficult to say. Being at the wedding of Caius
					with Livia Orestilla, he ordered the bride to be carried to his own house, but
					within a few days divorced her, and two years after banished her; because it was
					thought, that upon her divorce she returned to the embraces of her former
					husband. Some say, that being invited to the wedding-supper, he sent a message
					to Piso, who sat opposite to him, in these words: "Do not be too fond with my
					wife," and that he immediately carried her off. Next day he published a
					proclamation, importing, "That he had got a wife as Romulus and Augustus had done." Lollia Paulina, who was married to a man
					of consular rank in command of an army, he suddenly called from the province
					where she was with her husband, upon mention being made that her grandmother was
					formerly very beautiful, and married her; but he soon afterwards parted with
					her, interdicting her from having ever afterwards any commerce with man. He
					loved with a most passionate and constant affection Caesonia, who was neither
					handsome nor young, and was besides the mother of three daughters by another
					man; but a wanton of unbounded lasciviousness. Her he would frequently exhibit
					to the soldiers, dressed in a military cloak, with shield and helmet, and riding
					by his side. To his friends he even showed her naked. After she had a child, he
					honoured her with the title of wife; in one and the same day, declaring himself
					her husband, and father of the child of which she was delivered. He named it
					Julia Drusilla, and carrying it round the temples of all the goddesses, laid it
					on the lap of Minerva ; to whom he
					recommended the care of bringing up and instructing her. He considered her as
					his own child for no better reason than her savage temper, which was such even
					in infancy, that she would attack with her nails the face and eyes of the
					children at play with her.

It would be of little importance, as well as disgusting, to add to all this an
					account of the manner in which he treated his relations and friends; as Ptolemy,
					king Juba 's son, his cousin (for he was
					the grandson of Mark Antony by his daughter Selene ), and especially Macro himself, and Ennia
						likewise, by whose assistance he
					had obtained the empire; all of whom, for their alliance and eminent services,
					he rewarded with violent deaths. Nor was he more mild or respectful in his
					behaviour towards the senate. Some who had borne the highest offices in the
					government, he suffered to run by his litter in their togas for several miles
					together, and to attend him at supper, sometimes at the head of his couch,
					sometimes at his feet, with napkins. Others of them, after he had privately put
					them to death, he nevertheless continued to send for, as if they were still
					alive, and after a few days pretended that they had laid violent hands upon
					themselves. The consuls having forgotten to give public notice of his birth-day,
					he displaced them; and the republic was three days without any one in that high
					office. A quaestor who was said to be concerned in a conspiracy against him, he
					scourged severely, having first stripped off his clothes, and spread them under
					the feet of the soldiers employed in the work, that they might stand the more
					firm. The other orders likewise he treated with the same insolence and violence.
					Being disturbed by the noise of people taking their places at midnight in the
					circus, as they were to have free admission, he drove them all away with cubs.
					In this tumult, above twenty Roman knights were squeezed to death, with as many
					matrons, with a great crowd besides. - When stage-plays were acted, to occasion
					disputes between the people and the knights, he distributed the money-tickets
					sooner than usual, that the seats assigned to the knights might be all occupied
					by the mob. In the spectacles of gladiators, sometimes, when the sun was
					violently hot, he would order the curtains, which covered the amphitheatre, to
					be drawn aside, and forbad any person to be
					let out; withdrawing at the same time the usual apparatus for the entertainment,
					and presenting wild beasts almost pined to death, the most sorry gladiators,
					decrepit with age, and fit only to work the machinery, and decent house-keepers,
					who were remarkable for some bodily infirmity. Sometimes shutting up the public
					granaries, he would oblige thepeople to starve for a while.

He evinced the savage barbarity of his temper chiefly by the following
					indications. When flesh was only to be had at a high price for feeding his wild
					beasts reserved for the spectacles, he ordered that criminals should be given
					them to be devoured; and upon inspecting them in a row, while he stood in the
					middle of the portico, without troubling himself to examine their cases he
					ordered them to be dragged away, from "bald-pate to bald-pate." Of one person who had made a vow for his recovery to
					combat with a gladiator, he exacted its performance; nor would he allow him to
					desist until he came off conqueror, and after many entreaties. Another, who had
					vowed to give his life for the same cause, having shrunk from the sacrifice, he
					delivered, adorned as a victim, with garlands and fillets, to boys, who were to
					drive him through the streets, calling on him to fulfil his vow, until he was
					thrown headlong from the ramparts. After disfiguring many persons of honorable
					rank, by branding them in the face with hot irons, he condemned them to .the
					mines, to work in repairing the highways, or to fight with wild beasts; or tying
					them by the neck and heels, in the manner of beasts carried to slaughter, would
					shut them up in cages or saw them asunder. Nor were these severities merely
					inflicted for crimes of great enormity, but for making remarks on his public
					games, or for not having sworn by the Genius of the emperor. He compelled
					parents to be present at the execution of their sons; and to one who excused
					himself on account of indisposition he sent his own litter. Another he invited
					to his table immediately after he had witnessed the spectacle, and coolly
					challenged him to jest and be merry. He ordered the overseer of the spectacles
					and wild beasts to be scourged in fetters, during several days successively, in
					his own presence and did not put him to death until he was disgusted with the
					stench of his putrefied brain. He burned alive, in the centre of the arena of
					the amphitheatre, the writer of a farce, for some witty verse, which had a
					double meaning. A Roman knight, who had been exposed to the wild beasts, crying
					out that he was innocent, he called him back, and having had his tongue cut out,
					remanded him to the arena.

Asking a certain person, whom he recalled after a long exile, how he used to
					spend his time, he replied, with flattery, "I was always praying the gods for
					what has happened, that Tiberius might
					die and you be emperor." Concluding, therefore, that those he had himself
					banished also prayed for his death, he sent orders round the islands to have them put to death.
					Being very desirous to have a senator torn to pieces, he employed some persons
					to call him a public enemy, fall upon him as he entered the senate-house, stab
					him with their styles, and deliver him to the rest to tear asunder. Nor was he
					satisfied until he saw the limbs and bowels of the man, after they had been
					dragged through the streets, piled up in a heap before him.

He aggravated his barbarous actions by language equally outrageous. "There is
					nothing in my nature," said he,' that I commend or approve so much as my
						 ἀδιατρεψία (inflexible rigour)." Upon
					his grandmother Antonia 's giving him
					some advice, as if it was a small matter to pay no regard to it, he said to her,
					"Remember that all things are lawful for me." When about to murder his brother,
					whom he suspected of taking antidotes against poison, he said, "See then an
					andidote against Caesar!" And when he banished his sisters, he told them in a
					menacing tone, that he had not only islands at command, but also swords. One of
					pretorian rank having sent several times from Anticyra, whither he had gone for his health, to have his
					leave of absence prolonged, he ordered him to be put to death; adding these
					words: "Bleeding is necessary for one that has taken hellebore so long and found
					no benefit." It was his custom every tenth day to sign the lists of prisoners
					appointed for execution; and this he called "clearing his accounts." And having
					condemned several Gauls and Greeks at one time, he exclaimed in triumph, "I have
					conquered Gallograecia."

He generally prolonged the sufferings of his victims by causing them to be
					inflicted by slight and frequently repeated strokes; this being his well-known
					and constant order: "Strike so that he may feel himself die." Having punished
					one person for another, by mistaking his name, he said "he deserved it quite as
					much." He had frequently in his mouth these words of the tragedian: Oderint dum metuant. 
					 I scorn their hatred, if they do but fear me. He would often
					inveigh against all the senators writhout exception, as clients of Sejanus, and
					informers against his mother and brothers, producing the memorials which he had
					pretended to burn, and excusing the cruelty of Tiberius as necessary, since it was impossible to question the
					veracity of such a number of accusers. He continually reproached the whole equestrian
					order, as devoting themselves to nothing but acting on the stage, and fighting
					as gladiators. Being incensed at the people's applauding a party at the
					Circensian games in opposition to him, he exclaimed, "I wish the Roman people
					had but one neck." When Tetrinius, the highwayman, was
					denounced, he said his persecutors too were all Tetrinius's. Five Retiarii,
						 in tunics, fighting in a
					company, yielded without a struggle to the same number of opponents; and being
					ordered to be slain, one of them taking up his lance again, killed all the
					conquerors. This he lamented in a proclamation as a most cruel butchery, and
					cursed all those who had borne the sight of it.

He used to complain aloud of the state of the times, because it was not rendered
					remarkable by any public calamities; for, while the reign of Augustus had been
					made memorable to posterity by the disaster of Varus, and that of Tiberius by the fall of the theatre at Fidenae, his was likely to pass into oblivion, from an uninterrupted
					series of prosperity. And, at times, he wished for some terrible slaughter of
					his troops, a famine, a pestilence, conflagrations, or an earthquake.

Even in the midst of his diversions, while gaming or feasting, this savage
					ferocity, both in his language and actions, never forsook him. Persons were
					often put to the torture in his presence, whilst he was dining or carousing. A
					soldier, who was an adept in the art of beheading, used at such times to take
					off the heads of prisoners, who were brought in for that purpose. At Puteoli , at the dedication of the bridge which
					he planned, as already mentioned, he invited a number of people to come to him from the shore, and
					then suddenly threw them headlong into the sea; thrusting down with poles and
					oars those who, to save themselves, had got hold of the rudders of the ships. At
						 Rome , in a public feast, a slave
					having stolen some thin plates of silver with which the couches were inlaid, he
					delivered him immediately to an executioner, with orders to cut off his hands,
					and lead him round the guests, with them hanging from his neck before his
					breast, and a label, signifying the cause of his punishment. A gladiator, who
					was practising with him, and voluntarily threw himself at his feet, he stabbed
					with a poniard, and then ran about with a palm branch in his hand, after the
					manner of those who are victorious in the games. When a victim was to be offered
					upon an altar, he, clad in the habit of the Popae. and holding the axe
					aloft for a while, at last, instead of the animal, slaughtered an officer who
					attended to cut up the sacrifice. And at a sumptuous entertainment, he fell
					suddenly into a violent fit of laughter, and upon the consuls, who reclined next
					to him, respectfully asking him the occasion, "Nothing," replied he, "but that,
					upon a single nod of mine, you might both have your throats cut."

Among many other jests, this was one: As he stood by the statue of Jupiter , he asked Apelles, the tragedian,
					which of them he thought was biggest? Upon his demurring about it, he lashed him
					most severely, now and then commending his voice whilst he entreated for mercy,
					as being well modulated even when he was venting his grief. As often as he
					kissed the neck of his wife or mistress, hewould say, "So beautiful a throat
					must be cut whenever Tplease;" and now and then he would threaten to put his
					dear Caesonia to the torture, that he pnight discover why he loved her so
					passionately.

In his behaviour towards men of almost all ages, he discovered a degree of
					jealousy and malignity equal to that of his cruelty and pride. He so demolished
					and dispersed the statues of several illustrious persons, which had been removed
					by Augustus, for want of room, from the court of the Capitol into the Campus Martius , that it was impossible to set
					them up again with their inscriptions entire. And for the future, he forbad any
					statue whatever to be erected without his knowledge and leave. He had thoughts,
					too, of suppressing Homer's poems: "For why," said he, "may not I do what Plato
					has done before me, who excluded him from his commonvealth?" He was likewise very
					near banishing the writings and the busts of Virgil and Livy from all libraries: censuring one of them as a
					man of no genius and very little learning and the other as " a verbose and
					careless historian. He often talked of the lawyers as if he intended to abolish
					their profession. "By Hercules!" he would say, "I shall put it out of their
					power to answer any questions in law, otherwise than by referring to me!"

He took from the noblest persons in the city the ancient marks of distinction
					used by their families; as the collar from Torquatus; from Cincinnatus the curl of hair; and from Cneius Pompey the surname of the Great,
					belonging to that ancient family. Ptolemy, mentioned before, whom he invited
					from his kingdom, and received with great honours, he suddenly put to death, for
					no other reason, but because he observed that upon entering the theatre, at a
					public exhibition, he attracted the eyes of all the spectators by the splendour
					of his purple robe. As often as he met with handsome men, who had fine heads of
					hair, he would order the back of their heads to be shaved, to make them appear
					ridiculous. There was one Esius Proculus, the son of a centurion of the first
					rank, who, for his great stature and fine proportions, was called the Colossal.
					Him he ordered to be dragged from his seat in the arena, and matched with a
					gladiator in light armour, and afterwards with another completely armed; and
					upon his worsting them both, commanded him forthwith to be bound, to be led
					clothed in rags up and down the streets of the city, and, after being exhibited
					in that plight to the women, to be then butchered. There was no man of so abject
					or mean condition whose excellency in any kind he did not envy. The Rex
					Nemorensis having many years enjoyed the honour of the priesthood, he
					procured a still stronger antagonist to oppose him. One Porius, who fought in a
					chariot, having been
					victorious in an exhibition, and in his joy given freedom to a slave, was
					applauded so vehemently that Caligula rose in such haste from his seat that,
					treading upon the hem of his toga, he tumbled down the steps, full of
					indignation, and crying out, "A people who are masters of the world, pay greater
					respect to a gladiator for a trifle, than to princes admitted amongst the gods,
					or to my own majesty here present amongst them."

He never had the least regard either to the chastity of his own person, or that
					of others Besides his incest with his sisters, and his notorious passion
					for Pyrallis, the prostitute, there was hardly any lady of distinction with whom
					he did not make free. He used commonly to invite them with their husbands to
					supper, and as they passed by the couch on which he reclined at table, examine
					them very closely, like those who traffic in slaves; and if any one from modesty
					held down her face, he raised it up with his hand. Afterwards, as often as he
					was in the humour, he would quit the room, send for her he liked best, and in a
					short time return with marks of recent disorder about them. He would then
					commend or disparage her in the presence of the company, recounting the charms
					or defects of her person and behaviour in private. To some he sent a divorce in
					the name of their absent husbands, and ordered it to be registered in the public
					acts.

In the devices of his profuse expenditure, he surpassed all the prodigals that
					ever lived; inventing a new kind of bath, with strange dishes and suppers,
					washing in precious unguents, both warm and cold, drinking pearls of immense
					value dissolved in vinegar, and serving up for his guests loaves and other
					victuals modelled in gold; often saying, " that a man ought either to be a good
					economist or an emperor." Besides, he scattered money to a prodigious amount
					among the people, from the top of the Julian Basilica, during several days successively. He built two ships with ten
					banks of oars, after the Liburnian fashion, the poops of which blazed with
					jewels, and the sails were of various parti-colours. They were fitted up with
					ample baths, galleries, and saloons, and supplied with a great variety of vines
					and other fruit-trees. In these he would sail in the day-time along the coast of
						 Campania , feasting amidst dancing
					and concerts of music. In building his palaces and villas, there was nothing he
					desired to effect so much, in defiance of all reason, as what was considered
					impossible. Accordingly, moles were formed in the deep, and adverse sea, rocks of the hardest stone cut
					away, plains raised to the height of mountains with a vast mass of earth, and
					the tops of mountains levelled by digging; and all these were to be executed
					with incredible speed, for the least remissness was a capital offence. Not to
					mention particulars, he spent enormous sums, and the whole treasures which had
					been amassed by Tiberius Caesar, amounting to two thousand seven hundred
					millions of sesterces, within less than a year.

Having therefore quite exhausted these funds, and being in want of money, he had
					recourse to plundering the people, by every mode of false accusation,
					confiscation, and taxation, that could be invented. He declared that no one had
					any right to the freedom of Rome ,
					although their ancestors had acquired it for themselves and their posterity,
					unless they were sons; for that none beyond that degree ought to be considered
					as posterity. When the grants of the Divine Julius and Augustus were produced to
					him, he only said, that he was very sorry that they were obsolete and out of
					date. He also charged all those with making false returns, who, after the taking
					of the census, had by any means whatever increased their property. He annulled
					the wills of all who had been centurions of the first rank, as testimonies of
					their base ingratitude, if from the beginning of Tiberius 's reign they had not left either that prince or
					himself their heir. He also set aside the wills of all others, if any person
					only pretended to say, that they designed at their death to leave Caesar their
					heir. The public becoming terrified at this proceeding, he was now appointed
					joint-heir with their friends, and in the case of parents with their children,
					by persons unknown to him. Those who lived any considerable time after making
					such a will, he said, were only making game of him; and accordingly he sent many
					of them poisoned cakes. He used to try such causes himself; fixing previously
					the sum he proposed to raise during the sitting, and, after he had secured it,
					quitting the tribunal. Impatient of the least delay, he condemned by a single
					sentence forty persons, against whom there were different charges; boasting to
					Caesonia when she awoke, "how much business he had dispatched while she was
					taking her mid-day sleep." He exposed to sale by auction, the remains of the
					apparatus used in the public spectacles; and exacted such biddings, and raised
					the prices so high, that some of the purchasers were ruined, and bled themselves
					to death. There is a well-known story told of Aponius Saturninae, who happening
					to fall asleep as he sat on a bench at the sale, Caius called out to the
					auctioneer, not to overlook the praetorian personage who nodded to him so often;
					and accordingly the salesman went on, pretending to take the nods for tokens of
					assent, until thirteen gladiators were knocked down to him at the sum of nine
					millions of sesterces, he being in total ignorance of what was doing.

Having also sold in Gaul all the
					clothes, furniture, slaves, and even freedmen belonging to his sisters, at
					prodigious prices, after their condemnation, he was so much delighted with his
					pains that he sent to Rome for all the
					furniture of the old palace; pressing for its conveyance all
					the carriages let to hire in the city, with the horses and mules belonging to
					the bakers, so that they often wanted bread at Rome ; and many who had suits at law in progress lost their
					causes, because they could not make their appearance in due time according to
					their recognizances. In the sale of this furniture every artifice of fraud and
					imposition was employed. Sometimes he would rail at the bidders for being
					niggardly, and ask them " if they were not ashamed to be richer than he was ?"
					at another he would affect to be sorry that the property of princes should be
					passing into the hands of private persons. He had found out that a rich
					provincial had given two hundred thousand sesterces to his chamberlains for an
					underhand invitation to his table, and he was much pleased to find that honour
					valued at so high a rate. The day following, as the same person was sitting at
					the sale, he sent him some bauble, for which he told him he must pay two hundred
					thousand sesterces, and " that he should sup with Caesar upon his own
					invitation."

He levied new taxes, and such as were never before known, at first by the
					publicans, but afterwards, because their profit was enormous, by centurions and
					tribunes of the pretorian guards; no description of property or persons was
					exempted from some kind of tax or other. For all eatables brought into the city
					a certain excise was exacted; for all law-suits or trials, in whatever court,
					the fortieth part of the sum in dispute; and such as were convicted of
					compromising litigations were made liable to a penalty. Out of the daily wages
					of the porters he received an eighth, and from the gains of common prostitutes,
					what they received for one favour granted. There was a clause in the law, that
					all bawds who kept women for prostitution or sale, should be liable to pay, and
					that marriage itself should not be exempted.

These taxes being imposed, but the act by which they were levied never submitted
					to public inspection, great grievances were experienced from the want of
					sufficient knowledge of the law. At length, on the urgent demands of the Roman
					people, he published the law, but it was written in a very small hand, and
					posted up in a corner, so that no one could make a copy of it. To leave no sort
					of gain untried, he opened brothels in the Palatium, with a number of cells,
					furnished suitably to the dignity of the place; in which married women and free
					born youths were ready for the reception of visitors. He sent likewise his
					nomenclators about the forums and courts, to invite people of all ages, the old
					as well as the young; to his brothel, to come and satisfy their lusts: and he
					was ready to lend his customers money upon interest; clerks attending to take
					down their names in public, as persons who contributed to the emperor's revenue.
					Another method of raising money, which he thought not below his notice, was
					gaming, which, by the help of lying and perjury, he turned to considerable
					account. Leaving once the management of his play to his partner in the game, he
					stepped into the court, and observing two rich Roman knights passing by, he
					ordered them immediately to be seized, and their estates confiscated. Then
					returning in great glee, he boasted that he had never made a better throw in his
					life.

After the birth of his daughter, complaining of his poverty, and the burdens to
					which he was subjected, not only as an emperor, but a father, he made a general
					collection for her maintenance and fortune. He likewise gave public notice, that
					he would receive new-year's gifts on the calends of January following; and
					accordingly stood in the vestibule of his house, to clutch the presents which
					the people of all ranks threw down before him by handfuls and lapfuls. At last,
					being seized with an invincible desire of feeling money, taking off his
					slippers, he repeatedly walked oyer great heaps of gold coin spread upon the
					spacious floor, and then laying himself down, rolled his whole body in gold over
					and over again.

Only once in his life did he take an active part in military affairs, and then
					not from any set purpose, but during his journey to Mevania , to see the grove and river of Clitumnus . Being recommended to recruit a body of
					Batavians, who attended him, he resolved upon an expedition into Germany . Immediately he drew together several
					legions, and auxiliary forces from all quarters, and made every where new levies
					with the utmost rigour. Collecting supplies of all kinds, such as never had been
					assembled upon the like occasion, he set forward on his march, and pursued it
					sometimes with so much haste and precipitation, that the pretorian cohorts were
					obliged, contrary to custom, to pack their standards on horses or mules, and so
					follow him. At other times, he would march so slow and luxuriously, that he was
					carried in a litter by eight men; ordering the roads to be swept by the people
					of the neighbouring towns, and sprinkled with water to lay the dust.

On arriving at the camp, in order to show himself an active general, and severe
					disciplinarian, he cashiered the lieutenants who came up late with the auxiliary
					forces from different quarters. In reviewing the army, he deprived of their
					companies most of the centurions of the first rank, who had now served their
					legal time in the wars, and some whose time would have expired in a few days;
					alleging against them their age and infirmity; and railing at the covetous
					disposition of the rest of them, he reduced the bounty due to those who had
					served out their time to the sum of six thousand sesterces. Though he only
					received the submission of Adminius, the son of Cunobeline, a British king, who
					being driven from his native country by his father, came over to him with a
					small body of troops, yet, as if
					the whole island had been surrendered to him, he dispatched magnificent letters
					to Rome . ordering the hearers to
					proceed in their carriages directly up to the forum and the senate-house, and
					not to deliver the letters but to the consuls in the temple of Mars, and in the
					presence of a full assembly of the senators.

Soon after this, there being no hostilities, he ordered a few Germans of his
					guard to be carried over and placed in concealment on the other side of the
						 Rhine , and word to be brought him
					after dinner, that an enemy was advancing with great impetuosity. This being
					accordingly done, he immediately threw himself, with his friends, and a party of
					the pretorian knights, into the adjoining wood, where lopping branches from the
					trees, and forming trophies of them, he returned by torch-light, upbraiding
					those who did not follow him, with timorousness and cowardice: but he presented
					the companions and sharers of his victory with crowns of a new form, and under a
					new name, having the sun, moon, and stars represented on them, which he called
					Exploratorie. Again, some hostages were by his order taken from the school, and
					privately sent off; upon notice of which he immediately rose from table, pursued
					them with the cavalry, as if they had run away, and coming up with them, brought
					them back in fetters; proceeding to an extravagant pitch of ostentation likewise
					in his military comedy. Upon his again sitting down to table, it being reported
					to him that the troops were all reassembled, he ordered them to sit down as they
					were, in their armour, animating them in the words of the well-known verse of
					Virgil: 
						 Durate, et vosmet rebus servate
							secundis. 
						 Aen. 1.207 
					 
					 Bear up, and save yourselves for better
						days. In the meantime he reprimanded the senate and people of
						 Rome in a very severe proclamation
					"For revelling and frequenting the diversions of the circus and the theatre, and
					enjoying themselves at their villas, whilst their emperor was fighting and
					exposing himself to the greatest dangers."

At last, as if resolved to make war in earnest, he drew up his army on the shore
					of the ocean, with his balistk and other engines of war, and while no one could
					imagine what he intended to do, on a sudden commanded them to gather up the sea
					shells, and fill their helmets and the folds of their dress with them, calling
					them " the spoils of the ocean due to the Capitol and the Palatium." As a
					monument of his success, he raised a lofty tower, upon which, as at Pharos, he ordered lights to be burned in the
					night-time for the direction of ships at sea; and then promising the soldiers a
					donative of a hundred denarii a man,
					as if he had surpassed the most eminent examples of generosity, "Go your ways,"
					said he, "and be merry; go, ye are rich."

In making preparations for his triumph, besides the prisoners and deserters from
					the barbarian armies, he picked out the men of greatest stature in all
						 Gaul , such as he said were fittest
					to grace a triumph, with some of the chiefs, and reserved them to appear in the
					procession, obliging them not only to dye their hair yellow and let it grow
					long, but to learn the German language and assume the names commonly used in
					that country. He ordered likewise the gallies in which he had entered the ocean
					to be conveyed to Rome a great part of
					the way by land, and wrote to his comptrollers in the city " to make proper
					preparations for a triumph against his arrival, at as small expense as possible;
					but on a scale such as had never been seen before, since they had full power
					over the property of every one."

Before he left the province he formed a design of the most horrid cruelty-to
					massacre the legions which had mutinied upon the death of Augustus, for seizing
					and detaining his father, Germanicus, their commander, and himself, then an
					infant, in the camp. Though he was with great difficulty dissuaded from this
					rash attempt, yet neither the most urgent entreaties nor representations could
					prevent him from persisting in the design of decimating these legions.
					Accordingly, he ordered them to assemble unarmed, without so much as their
					swords, and then surrounded them with armed horse. But finding that many of
					them, suspecting that violence was intended, were making off to arm in their own
					defence, he quitted the assembly as fast as he could, and immediately marched
					for Rome , bending now all his fury
					against the senate, whom he publicly threatened, to divert the general attention
					from the clamour excited by his disgraceful conduct. Amongst other pretexts of
					offence, he complained that he was defrauded of a triumph which was justly his
					due, though he had just before forbidden, upon pain of death, any honour to be
					decreed him.

In his march he was waited upon by deputies from the senatorian order, entreating
					him to hasten his return. He replied to them, "I will come, I will come, and
					this with me," striking at the same time the hilt of his sword. He issued
					likewise this proclamation: "I am coming, but for those only who wish for me,
					the equestrian order and the people; for I shall no longer treat the senate as
					their fellow-citizen or prince." He forbad any of the senators to come to meet
					him; and either abandoning or deferring his triumph, he entered the city in
					ovation on his'birth-day. Within four months from this period he was slain,
					after he had perpetrated enormous crimes, and while he was meditating the
					execution, if possible, of still greater. He had entertained a design of
					removing to Antium , and afterwards
					to Alexandria , having first cut
					off the flower of the equestrian and senatorian orders. This is placed beyond
					all question by two books which were found in his cabinet under different
					titles, one being called the sword, and the other the dagger. They both
					contained private marks, and the names of those who were devoted to death. There
					was also found a large chest, filled with a variety of poisons, which being
					afterwards thrown into the sea by order of Claudius, are said to have so
					infected the waters that the fish were poisoned and cast dead by the tide upon
					the neighbouring shores.

He was tall, of a pale complexion, ill-shaped, his neck and legs very slender,
					his eyes and temples hollow, his brows broad and knit, his hair thin, and the
					crown of the head bald. The other parts of his body were much covered with hair.
					On this account it was reckoned a capital crime for any person to look down from
					above as he was passing by, or so much as to name a goat. His countenance, which
					was naturally hideous and frightful, he purposely rendered more so, forming it
					before a mirror into the most horrible contortions. He was crazy both in body
					and mind, being subject, when a boy, to the falling sickness, When he arrived at
					the age of man hood he endured fatigue tolerably well; but still, occasionally,
					he was liable to a faintness, during which he remained incapable of any effort.
					He was not insensible of the disorder of his mind, and sometimes had thoughts of
					retiring to clear his brain. It is believed that his wife Caesonia
					administered to him a love potion which threw him into a frenzy. What most of
					all disordered him was want of sleep, for he seldom had more than three or four
					hours rest in a night; and even then his sleep was not sound, but disturbed by
					strange dreams, fancying, among other things, that a form representing the ocean
					spoke to him. Being, therefore, often weary with lying awake so long, sometimes
					he sat up in his bed, at others, walked in the longest porticos about the house,
					and from time to time invoked and looked out for the approach of day.

To this crazy constitution of his mind may, I think, very justly be ascribed two
					faults which he had of a nature directly repugnant one to the other, namely, an
					excessive confidence and the most abject timidity. For he, who affected so much
					to despise the gods, was ready to shut his eyes and wrap up his head in his
					cloak at the slightest storm of thunder and lightning; and if it was violent he
					got up and hid himself under his bed. In his visit to Sicily , after ridiculing many strange objects
					which that country affords, he ran away suddenly in the night from Messini , terrified by the smoke and rumbling
					at the summit of Mount AEtna. And though in words he was very valiant against
					the barbarians, yet upon passing a narrow defile in Germany in his light car, surrounded by a strong body of his
					troops, some one happening to say, "There would be no small consternation
					amongst us if an enemy were to appear," he immediately mounted his horse and
					rode towards the bridge in great haste; but finding them blocked up with
					camp-followers and baggage-wagons, he was in such a hurry that he caused himself
					to be carried in men's hands over the heads of the crowd. Soon afterwards, upon
					hearing that the Germans were again in rebellion, he prepared to quit Rome and equipped a fleet, comforting himself
					with this consideration, that if the enemy should prove victorious and possess
					themselves of the heights of the Alps 
					as the Cimbri had done, or of the city, as the
						 Senones 
					 formerly did,
					he should still have in reserve the transmarine provinces. 
					Hence it was, I suppose, that it occurred to his assassins to invent the story
					intended to pacify the troops who mutinied at his death, that he had laid
					violent hands upon himself in a fit of terror occasioned by the news brought him
					of the defeat of his army.

In the fashion of his clothes, shoes, and all the rest of his dress, he did not
					wear what was either national, or properly civic, or peculiar to the male sex,
					or appropriate to mere mortals. He often appeared abroad in a short coat of
					stout cloth, richly embroidered and blazing with jewels, in a tunic with
					sleeves, and with bracelets upon his arms; sometimes all in silks and habited
					like a woman; at other times in the crepide or buskins; sometimes in the sort of
					shoes used by the lightarmed soldiers, or in the sock used by women, and
					commonly with a golden beard fixed to his chin, holding in his hand a
					thunderbolt, a trident, or a caduceus, marks of distinction belonging to the
					gods only. Sometimes, too, he appeared in the habit of Venus. He wore very
					commonly the triumphal ornaments, even before his expedition, and sometimes the
					breast-plate of Alexander the Great, taken out of his coffin.

With regard to the liberal sciences, he was little conversant in philology, but
					applied himself with assiduity to the study of eloquence, being indeed in point
					of enunciation tolerably elegant and ready; and in his perorations, when he was
					moved to anger, there was an abundant flow of words and periods. In speaking,
					his action was vehement, and his voice so strong, that he was heard at a great
					distance. When winding up an harangue, he threatened to draw " the sword of his
					lucubration," holding a loose and smooth style in such contempt, that he said
					Seneca, who was then much admired, "wrote only detached essays," and that "his
					language was nothing but sand without lime." He often wrote answers to the
					speeches of successful orators; and employed himself in composing accusations or
					vindications of eminent persons, who were impeached before the senate; and gave
					his vote for or against the party accused, according to his success in speaking,
					inviting the equestrian order, by proclamation, to hear him.

He also zealously applied himself to the practice of several other arts of
					different kinds, such as fencing, charioteering, singing, and dancing. In the
					first of these, he practiced with the weapons used in war; and drove the chariot
					in circuses built in several places. He was so extremely fond of singing and
					dancing, that he could not refrain in the theatre from singing with the
					tragedians, and imitating the gestures of the actors, either by way of applause
					or correction. A night exhibition which he had ordered the day he was slain, was
					thought to be intended for no other reason, than to take the opportunity
					afforded by the licentiousness of the season, to make his first appearance upon
					the stage. Sometimes, also, he danced in the night. Summoning once to the
					palatium, in the second watch of the night, three men of consular rank, who
					feared the words of the message, he placed them on the proscenium of the stage,
					and then suddenly came bursting out, with a loud noise of flutes and
						castanets, dressed in a mantle and tunic reaching down to his heels.
					Having danced out a song, he retired. Yet he who had acquired such dexterity in
					other exercises, never learnt to swim.

Those for whom he once conceived a regard, he favoured even to madness. He used
					to kiss Mnester, the pantomimic actor, publicly in the theatre; and if any
					person made the least noise while he was dancing, he would order him to be
					dragged from his seat, and scourged him with his own hand. A Roman knight once
					making some bustle, he sent him, by a centurion, an order to depart forthwith
					for Ostia , and carry a
					letter from him to king Ptolemy in Mauritania . The letter was comprised in these words: "Do
					neither good nor harm to the bearer." He made some gladiators captains of his
					German guards. He deprived the gladiators called Mirmillones of some of their
					arms. One Columbus coming off with
					victory in a combat, but being slightly wounded, he ordered some poison to be
					infused in the wound, which he thence called Columbinum. For thus it was
					certainly named with his own hand in a list of other poisons. He was so
					extravagantly fond of the party of charioteers whose colours were green, that he supped and lodged for some time
					constantly in the stable where their horses were kept. At a certain revel, he
					made a present of two millions of sesterces to one Cythicus, a driver of a
					chariot. The day before the Circensian games, he used to send his soldiers to
					enjoin silence in the neighbourhood, that the repose of his horse Incitatus , might not be disturbed. For this favourite animal,
					besides a marble stable, an ivory manger, purple housings, and a jewelled
					frontlet, he appointed a house, with a retinue of slaves, and fine furniture,
					for the reception of such as were invited in the horse's name to sup with him.
					It is even said that he intended to make him consul.

In this frantic and savage career, numbers had formed designs for cutting him
					off; but one or two conspiracies being discovered, and others postponed for want
					of opportunity, at last two men concerted a plan together. and accomplished
					their purpose; not without the privity of some of the greatest favourites
					amongst his freedmen, and the prefects of the pretorian guards; because, having
					been nante, though falsely, as concerned in one conspiracy against hipi, they
					perceived that they were suspected and become objects of his hatred. For he had
					immediately endeavoured to render them obnoxious to the soldiery, drawing his
					sword, and declaring, "That he would kill himself if they thought him worthy of
					death ;" and ever after he was continually accusing them to one another, and
					setting them all mutually at variance. The conspirators having resolved to fall
					upon him as he returned at noon from the Palatine garies, Cassius Charea, tribune of the pretorian
					guards, claimed the part of making the onset. This Chaerea was now an elderly
					man, and had been often reproached by Caius for effeminacy. When he came for the
					watchword, the latter would give "Priapus," or " Venus ;" and if on any occasion he returned thanks, would offer
					him his hand to kiss, making with his fingers an obscene gesture.

His approaching fate was indicated by many prodigies. The statue of Jupiter at Olympia , which he had ordered to be taken down and brought to
						 Rome , suddenly burst out into such
					a violent fit of laughter, that, the machines employed in the work giving way,
					the workmen took to their heels. When this accident happened, there came up a
					man named Cassius, who said that he was commanded in a dream to sacrifice a bull
					to Jupiter . The Capitol at Capua was struck with lightning upon the ides
					of March [i th March]; as was also, at Rome , the apartment of the chief porter of the Palatiun. Some
					construed the latter into a presage that the master of the palace was in danger
					from his own guards; and the other they regarded as a sign, that an illustrious
					person would be cut off, as had happened before on that day. Sylla, the
					astrologer, being consulted by him respecting his nativity, assured him, "That
					death would unavoidably and speedily befall him." The oracle of Fortune at
						 Antium likewise forewarned him of
					Cassius; on which account he had given orders for putting to death Cassius Longi
					nus, at that time proconsul of Asia ,
					not considering that Chaerea bore also that name. The day preceding his death he
					dreamt that he was standing in heaven near the throne of Jupiter, who giving him
					a push with the great toe of his right foot, he fell headlong upon the earth.
					Some things which happened the very day of his death, and only a little before
					it, were likewise considered as ominous presages of that event. Whilst he was at
					sacrifice, he was bespattered with the blood of a flamingo. And Mnester, the
					pantomimic actor, performed in a play, which the tragedian Neoptolemus had
					formerly acted at the games in which Philip, the king of Macedon , was slain. And in the piece called
					Laureolus, in which the principal actor, running out in a hurry, and falling,
					vomited blood, several of the inferior actors vying with each other to give the
					best specimen of their art, made the whole stage flow with blood. A spectacle
					had been purposed to be performed that night, in which the fables of the
					infernal regions were to be represented by Egyptians and Ethiopians.

On the ninth of the calends of February [24th January], and about the seventh
					hour of the day, after hesitating whether he should rise to dinner, as his
					stomach was disordered by what he had eaten the day before, at last, by the
					advice of his friends, he came forth. In the vaulted passage through which he
					had to pass, were some boys of noble extraction, who had been brought from
						 Asia to act upon the stage, waiting
					for him in a private corridor, and he stopped to see and speak to them; and had
					not the leader of the party said that he was suffering from cold, he would have
					gone back, and made them act immediately. Respecting what followed, two
					different accounts are given. Some say, that, whilst he was speaking to the
					boys, Chaerea came behind him, and gave him a heavy blow on the neck with his
					sword first crying out, "Take this:" that then a tribune, by name Cornelius
					Sabinus, another of the conspirators, ran him through the breast. Others say,
					that the crowd being kept at a distance by some centurions who were in the plot,
					Sabinus came, according to custom,.fr. the word, and that Caius gave him
						" Jupiter ," upon which Chaerea cried
					out, "Be it so !" and then, on his looking round, clove one of his jaws with a
					blow. As he lay on the ground, crying out that he was still alive, the rest dispatched him with thirty wounds. For the word agreed
					upon among them all was, "Strike again." Some likewise ran their swords through
					his privy parts. Upon the first bustle, the litter bearers came running in with
					their poles to his assistance, and, immediately afterwards, his German body
					guards, who killed some of the assassins, and also some senators who had no
					concern in the affair.

He lived twenty-nine years, and reigned three years, ten months and eight days.
					His body was carried privately into the Lamian Gardens, where it was half
					burnt upon a pile hastily raised, and then had some earth carelessly thrown over
					it. It was afterwards disinterred by his sisters, on their return from
					banishment, burnt to ashes, and buried. Before this was done, it is well-known
					that the keepers of the gardens were greatly disturbed by apparitions; and that
					not a night passed without some terrible alarm or other in the house where he
					was slain, until it was destroyed by fire. His wife Caesonia was killed with
					him, being stabbed by a centurion; and his daughter had her brains knocked out
					against a wall.

Of the miserable condition of those times, any person may easily form an estimate
					from the following circumstances. When his death was made public, it was not
					immediately credited. People entertained a suspicion that a report of his being
					killed had been contrived and spread by himself with the view of discovering how
					they stood affected towards him. Nor had the conspirators fixed upon any one to
					succeed him. The senators were so unanimous in their resolution to assert the
					liberty of their country, that the consuls assembled them at first not in the
					usual place of meeting, because it was named after Julius Caesar, but in the
					Capitol. Some proposed to abolish the memory of the Caesars, and level their
					temples with the ground. It was particularly remarked on this occasion, that all
					the Caesars, who had the praenomen of Caius, died by the sword, from the Caius
					Caesar who was slain in the times of Cinna.

Remarks on Caligula 
				 Unfortunately, a great chasm in the annals of Tacitus, at this period, precludes
					all information from that historian respecting the reign of Caligula; but from
					what he mentions towards the close of the preceding chapter, it is evident that
					Caligula was forward to seize the reins of government upon the death of
					Tiberius, whom, though he rivalled him in his vices, he was far from imitating
					in his dissimulation. Amongst the people, the remembrance of Germanicus' virtues
					cherished for his family an attachment which was probably increased by its
					misfortunes; and they were anxious to see revived in the son the popularity of
					the father. Considering, however, that Caligula's vicious disposition was
					already known, and that it had even been an inducement with Tiberius to procure
					his succession, in order that it might prove a foil to his own memory, it is
					surprising that no effort was made at this juncture to shake off the despotism
					which had been so intolerable in the last reign, and restore the ancient liberty
					of the republic. Since the commencement of the imperial dominion, there never
					had been any period so favourable for a counter-revolution as the present
					crisis. There existed now no Livia to
					influence the minds of the senate and people in respect of the government; nor
					was there any other person allied to the family of Germanicus, whose countenance
					or intrigues could promote the views of Caligula. He himself was now only in the
					twenty-fifth year of his age, was totally inexperienced in the administration of
					public affairs, had never performed even the smallest service to his country,
					and was generally known to be of a character which disgraced his illustrious
					descent. Yet, in spite of all these circumstances, such was the destiny of
						 Rome , that his accession afforded
					joy to the soldiers, who had known him in his childhood, and to the populace in
					the capital, as well as the people in the provinces, who were flattered with the
					delusive expectation of receiving a prince who should adorn the throne with the
					amiable virtues of Germanicus. 
				 It is difficult to say, whether weakness of understanding, or corruption of
					morals, were more conspicuous in the character of Caligula. He seems to have
					discovered from his earliest years an innate depravity of mind, which was
					undoubtedly much increased by defect of education. He had lost both his parents
					at an early period of life; and from Tiberius's own character, as well as his views in training the
					person who should succeed him on the throne, there is reason to think, that if
					any attention whatever was paid to the education of Caligula, it was directed to
					vitiate all his faculties and passions, rather than to correct and improve them.
					If such was really the object, it was indeed prosecuted with success. 
				 The commencement, however, of his reign was such as by no means prognosticated
					its subsequent transition. The sudden change of his conduct, the astonishing
					mixture of imbecility and presumption, of moral turpitude and frantic
					extravagance, which he afterwards evinced; such as rolling himself over heaps of
					gold, his treatment of his horse Incitatus, and his design of making him consul,
					seem to justify a suspicion that his brain had actually been affected, either by
					the potion, said to have been given him by his wife Caesonia, or otherwise.
					Philtres, orlopyejotions, as they were called, were frequent in those times, and
					the people believed that they operated upon the mind by a mysterious and
					sympathetic power. It is, however, beyond a doubt, that their effects were
					produced entirely by the action of their physical the satyrion, which, according
					to Pliny, was a provocative. They were
					generally given by women to their husbands at bed-time; and it was necessary
					towards their successful operation, that the parties should sleep together. This
					circumstance explains the whole mystery. The philtres were nothing more than
					medicines of a stimulating quality, which, after exciting violent, but temporary
					effects, enfeebled the constitution, and occaioned nervous disorders, by which
					the mental faculties, as well as the corporeal, might be injured. That this was
					really the case with Caligula, seems probable, not only from the falling
					sickness, to which he was subject, but from the habitual wakefulness of which he
					complained. 
				 The profusion of this emperor, during his short reign of three years and ten
					months, is unexampled in history. In the midst of profound peace, without any
					extraordinary charges either civil or military, he expended, in less than one
					year, besides the current revenue of the empire, the sum of $108,796,875, which
					had been left by Tiberius at his death.
					To supply the extravagance of future years, new and exorbitant taxes were
					imposed upon the people, and those too on the necessaries of life. There existed
					now among the Romans every motive that could excite a general indignation
					against the government; yet such was still the dread of imperial power, though
					vested in the hands of so weak and despicable a sovereign, that no insurrection
					was attempted, nor any extensive conspiracy formed; but the obnoxious emperor
					fell at last a sacrifice to a few centurions of his own guard. 
				 This reign was of too short duration to afford any new productions in literature;
					but, had it been extended to a much longer period, the effects would probably
					have been the same. Polite learning never could flourish under an emperor who
					entertained a design of destroying the writings of Virgil and Livy. It is fortunate that these, and other valuable
					productions of antiquity, were too widely diffused over the world, and too
					carefully preserved, to be in danger of perishing through the frenzy of this
					capricious barbarian.